SUMMARY
Increasing cell size drives proteomic changes that impact cell physiology. However, the molecular basis of size-dependent proteome remodeling has remained unclear. Here, we develop an inducible Cyclin D1 expression system in human cells to generate proliferating cells spanning over a two-fold size range. We use this system to make comprehensive genome-wide measurements of mRNA and protein concentrations and stability. We find that protein and mRNA turnover rates are weakly related to cell size, but that mRNA concentrations are strongly size-dependent. This establishes that transcriptional regulation is the basis of proteome remodeling. Live-cell imaging of nascent mRNAs using the MS2 system is used to measure how transcriptional dynamics change with cell size. Larger cells prolong transcriptional bursts but maintain similar burst amplitudes to achieve transcriptional scaling. Together, our results show how transcription is modulated by cell size to remodel the proteome and alter cell physiology.

KEYWORDS
Cell size; scaling; homeostasis; turnover; transcription; bursting; single-molecule imaging; lysosomes

INTRODUCTION
Cell size is a fundamental cellular characteristic that influences physiology, fitness, and fate. For example, the small size of red blood cells facilitates their efficient deformation and circulation,1–3 while adipocyte functions are modulated by changes in cell size.4 The importance of maintaining an appropriate size is seen in the striking uniformity of cell size within a given type as well as the strong association between aberrant cell size and pathological states including cancer, senescence, and aging.5–15 Yet, apart from avoiding more extreme ends of the cell size distributions, it is unclear why cells target a characteristic size.16,17
New understanding of the physiological importance of cell size came from studies examining the molecular mechanisms that link cell growth to division to control cell size. These mechanisms typically couple cell growth to the timing of G1/S transition and involve key cell cycle regulatory proteins. For example, as cells grow larger, they dilute inhibitors of cell division, like the retinoblastoma protein RB in humans,18,19 Whi5 in budding yeast,20,21 KRP4 in plants,22 and TNY1 in algae.23 Increasing cell size can also increase the concentration of cell cycle activators, as is the case for Cdc25 in fission yeast.24 The commonality between the mechanisms identified thus far is that they all involve size-dependent changes in protein concentrations that trigger cell division.25 The discovery of these size control mechanisms highlighted the fact that increases in cell size could drive changes to protein concentrations.
The discovery of size-dependent changes in the concentrations of cell cycle regulator proteins suggested that the concentrations of other proteins could also depend on cell size. This observation went against the prevailing paradigm that the concentration of the vast majority of proteins would reflect the total protein concentration, which is largely independent of cell size until cells become extremely large.26–29 However, recent work using modern proteomic technology has definitively overturned this paradigm. When proliferating mammalian cells are stratified by their natural size variation using FACS and analyzed with proteomics, the concentrations of individual proteins do not generally remain constant. Instead, proteome composition is globally remodeled as cell size increases.30 Such wide-spread size-dependent changes in proteome composition were found in all cells studied so far, including both eukaryotes and prokaryotes.31–35 
Collectively, these works demonstrated that cell size must be tightly controlled because the further a cell deviates from its target size, the more compositionally different it becomes. The size-dependence of cell composition may explain the allometric relationship between cell size and biosynthesis. As cell size increases past its optimum, the concentrations of ribosomes and other biosynthetic proteins decrease, which coincides with a decline in growth rate and mitochondrial function.36,37 Ultimately, excessively large cells are unable to scale protein concentration with volume, leading to cytoplasmic dilution and senescence.37 
A series of recent studies have shed additional insight on how excessive cell enlargement leads to senescence.38 The blockade of CDK4/6 activity, which drives cell enlargement by preventing cell division but not preventing cell growth, leads to p21 upregulation and permanent G1 arrest.39 The enlarged cells that do re-enter the cell cycle upon removal of CDK4/6 inhibition were more susceptible to DNA damage,40 potentially from the under-production of DNA repair machinery.30,41 These deleterious effects on genome integrity and proliferation were mitigated if cell growth during arrest was downregulated through the inhibition of mTOR or the PI3K pathway.39–42 Similar phenomena were found upon CDK7 inhibition and subsequent cell size increase.42 Importantly, the size-dependent proteome remodeling measured in normal-sized cells and the ultimate failure of excessively-large cells to scale protein biosynthesis with size are both consequences of a declining DNA-to-cell volume ratio, since neither phenomena occur when increase in cell size coincides with proportional increase in ploidy.30,31,33,43 These studies strongly support the conclusion that excessive cell growth during cell cycle arrest is a major contributor to cellular senescence.14 
While increases in cell size drive important proteomic changes, the mechanism through which this happens is currently unclear. In principle, the size-dependence of any aspect of mRNA and protein synthesis and degradation could be responsible for the size-dependent changes to proteome composition. Here, we used a suite of high-throughput technologies to systematically measure major steps of the gene expression pathway to determine which, if any, are size-dependent. To do this, we first developed a genetic system that modulates the expression of CCND1 in hTERT RPE-1 cells to generate populations of cells that proliferate at different sizes. We find that human cells alter their transcriptome with the increase in cell size and that this change in transcriptome is likely driven by the mRNA synthesis and its altered bursting kinetics. By employing pulse SILAC-TMT and SLAMseq, we also find that both mRNA and protein turnover rates remain mostly stable and do not display differential changes across roughly twofold cell size. Our study pinpoints transcription as the key size-dependent pathway responsible for proteomic remodeling and provides insight into the potential molecular mechanisms involved in altered transcription dynamics.
RESULTS 
A new genetic system to probe how cell size influences mammalian cell physiology
To better understand how cell size influences mammalian cell physiology, we previously sorted proliferating cell lines by size in G1 using FACS and measured their proteome composition.30 Proteins whose relative concentrations increase or decrease with increasing cell size were termed super- and sub-scaling, respectively (Figure 1A,1B). In principle, the molecular mechanisms underpinning these size-dependent protein concentration changes could operate at the levels of transcription, translation, and turnover (Figure 1C). However, the necessity of sorting large numbers of cells limited our ability to rigorously probe each possible point of regulation using modern multiomics methods. To overcome this limitation, we sought to engineer a tractable experimental system to investigate how cell size impacts cell physiology. 
To engineer a genetic system to study size-dependent expression, we took inspiration from the fact that deletion or overexpression of G1 cyclins can alter cell size.44,45 We therefore integrated a doxycycline-inducible system to titrate the concentration of a G1 cyclin, CCND1, in an hTERT-immortalized retinal pigment epithelial cell line (hTERT RPE-1, hereafter RPE-1). We chose to use these RPE-1 cells as the basis of our system because they are diploid, genetically stable cells, and commonly used for cell size and cell cycle studies. To make larger cells, we added doxycycline to the media to express an shRNA that efficiently depletes cyclin D1. CCND1 knockdown lengthens G1 phase and thereby increases cell size (PTRE shCCND1). To make smaller cells, we also induce shRNA expression to deplete the endogenous CCND1, but now combine it with the overexpression of an shRNA resistant cyclin D1 allele (PTRE CCND1) (Figure S1A) (see methods). This perturbation shortens G1 to decrease cell size (Figure 1D,1E). After 4 days of induction, the cells reach a new semi-steady state that persists for at least ten days, as measured by Coulter counter. Although the large cells show a gradual decline in size, possibly due to selection pressure for cells that can overcome the effect of CCND1 knockdown, this decline is slow enough that it should not introduce major confounding effects into our analysis (Figure 1E). With the establishment of this tractable genetic system, we could now grow populations of cells that are cycling in steady state and have small, medium, or large sizes. 
After engineering cell lines that cycle at different sizes, we sought to confirm that protein expression levels and their size-dependence were similar to those of unmodified cells that were sorted by varying sizes. To check this, we collected PTRE shCCND1 and PTRE CCND1 cells induced for 3,4,5, and 6 days. Uninduced cells were also collected as they had intermediate sizes. In total, we obtained proliferating populations of cells spanning just over a two-fold size range, and measured their proteomes using TMT mass-spectrometry (Figure 1D, 1E). A principal component analysis of our mass-spectrometry dataset showed that the proteomes of large and small cells also reach a relative steady-state after 4 days of induction, mirroring the time of stabilization of cell size (Figure S1B, Figure 1E). Next, for each individual protein, we determined its concentration’s size-dependence by calculating a protein slope value as described previously (Figure 1F, Supplementary Table 1).30,33 Briefly, the protein slope is derived from a linear regression of the logarithm of relative changes in cell size against the logarithm of the relative changes in protein’s relative concentration. A slope value of 0 means no change in concentration with an increase in cell size, while slopes of 1 and -1 reflect a two-fold increase and decrease in concentration with a two-fold cell size increase, respectively (Figure 1B). The slope values derived from our CCND1 manipulation lines were highly correlated with those reported in our previous study using size-sorted immortalized and primary G1 cells (Figure 1G, S1C, Supplementary Table 1).30 The proteome slopes were also highly correlated with size-sorted primary mouse liver cells from another previous study (Figure S1D).33 Taken together, our analysis shows that CCND1 manipulation provides a convenient and powerful platform to generate populations of cells cycling at different sizes, which can be used to study size-dependent proteome remodeling.
Large cells are more vulnerable to lysosomal damage than smaller cells
While the size-dependence of some cell cycle regulatory proteins is functional, the vast majority of size-dependent proteome changes have not yet been linked to any function. In our original study of differential proteome scaling,30 we found lysosomal proteins to be among the most super-scaling proteins (Figure 1H). Lysosomes are major signaling hubs for metabolism, and their biogenesis and function are critical in cellular proteostasis and aging.46–48  Because defects in lysosome function and increased lysosomal content are known markers of senescence,49–51 we wondered whether the super-scaling of lysosomal proteins reflects a size-dependent change in the relative importance of lysosome function. We hypothesized that if cells depend more on proper lysosome function with increased cell size, we would see increased death in large cells relative to small cells when we perturbed lysosome function. To test this, we inhibited lysosome function in our CCND1 manipulated cell lines. After doxycycline-induction was used to reach the new target cell sizes (Figure S1E), cells were challenged with LLoMe, a lysosomotropic small molecule that physically compromises the lysosomal membrane and leads to cell death at higher concentrations. Upon acute treatment of 3mM LLoMe for 3 hours, we observed that large cells had higher rates of cell death than small cells as measured by Annexin V and cell permeability dye with flow cytometry (Figure 1I). Longer treatment for 48 hours with 50µM chloroquine, a small molecule that perturbs lysosomal pH and enzyme function, found a similar size-dependent increase in death, although the effect size was more subtle and relevant only in a narrow dosage range (Figure S1F, S1G). These size-dependent deaths were not due to a general vulnerability of large cells because treating cells with 20nM of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib over 2 days resulted in smaller cells dying at lower concentrations, which was the opposite effect (Figure S1H). We therefore conclude that large cells are specifically more vulnerable to lysosomal damage, which may be due to the super-scaling nature of the lysosomal proteins.
Cell cycle phase does not influence size-dependent proteome remodeling
Cell size and cell cycle phase are often confounding variables since cells that have spent more time progressing through the cell cycle are typically larger. In our previous work, we controlled for the potential confounding effects of the cell cycle by sorting differently-sized cells that were exclusively in G1 phase.30 Since most RPE-1s are in the G1 phase (~70%), this facilitated the size-dependent sorting of G1 cells (Figure 2A, non-induced conditions). Size-sorting G2 cells is considerably more difficult since G2 cells account for only 20% of the population and less than 5% in the large population. In contrast, using our new genetic system we can directly sort all G2 cells after they have reached their new target sizes, making the process of measuring differently-sized G2 cells feasible.
To disentangle the effects of cell size and cell cycle phase, we generated cells of different sizes and then sorted by G1 and G2 cell cycle phase (Figure 2B). We confirmed that we were able to isolate cell populations based on cell size and cell cycle stage (Figure 2C) and then conducted TMT-mass spectrometry to probe their protein compositions. We find that the protein concentrations varied far more across cell size than cell cycle phase, which supports our hypothesis that proteome composition changes in large cells are mainly driven by size changes rather than changes to their cell cycle phase distribution (Figure 2D). Moreover, changes to the proteome were linearly correlated with cell size for both G1 and G2 sorted cells, meaning that both populations remodel their proteome consistently along the size axis (Figure S2A). After calculating the rate of change of protein concentrations with cell size and cell cycle phase as before (Figure 2E, Supplementary Table 2), we compared the linear slope of protein concentration changes between G1 and G2. We found that protein slopes derived from G2 cells strongly correlated with those from both G1 cells and those from our asynchronous populations of CCND1-manipulated cells (Figure 2F, S2B, Supplementary Table 2). Together, these results demonstrate that the cell cycle has a very small effect on proteome composition and therefore does not confound the size-dependent proteome remodeling observed in large cells.
Protein turnover plays a minor role in determining the proteome’s size dependence
One way in which a protein’s cellular concentration can change is through its turnover (Figure 3A). Protein turnover comprises combined effects of both proteolytic degradation and dilution by cell growth (i.e., replacement with newly synthesized proteins). Previous studies have used metabolic labeling strategies to show that the turnover rates of individual proteins can vary widely.52–55 To test if protein turnover was size-dependent and contributed to proteome remodeling, we leveraged the semi-steady state nature of our CCND1 overexpression/knockdown system to employ a pulse SILAC-TMT mass spectrometry approach  (adapted from Zecha et al., 2018; see methods).56 Briefly, we first generated small and large populations of proliferating cells by culturing PTRE shCCND1 and PTRE CCND1 cells with doxycycline for five days. We then switched to media containing isotopically-labeled lysine and arginine to track the turnover of proteins over a ten day period. Individual timepoints were subsequently pooled together using isobaric TMT labels to measure SILAC ratios for the entire time course in a single multiplexed sample (Figure 3B). 
After establishing our labeling method, we determined the extent of the size-dependence of protein turnover and whether or not this contributed to size scaling. As expected, following the isotope switch, we observed the gradual replacement of one set of isotopically labelled proteins for another (Figure 3C). For individual proteins, we estimated their half-life (time to 50% replacement, or T50) by fitting a decay curve against all detected peptides mapping to their respective proteins (Figure 3D, Supplementary Table 3). At steady state, the rate of incorporation is theoretically equal to the rate of turnover. For simplicity, we opted to use protein half-life derived from turnover rates only, but we found that the protein half-life obtained from either rate was highly correlated (Figure S3A). The half-life obtained from our measurement also correlated well with a previously published study in HeLa cells, which used similar methods (Figure S3B, S3C).56 Overall, protein half-life was mostly constant across a near twofold size increase, indicating that the turnover rate of proteins are independent of cell size increase (Figure 3E, Supplementary Table 3). 
It has previously been shown that in cycling human cells, the majority of proteins are regulated at the level of dilution rather than degradation.56 For a protein concentration to be primarily regulated by degradation, its half-life would need to be shorter than the time scale associated with dilution, which is the time scale of growth and division. In other words, proteins would need to be degraded more quickly than the average cell cycle duration. We identified these short-lived proteins by estimating the cell cycle doubling time of our small and large cells through microscopy (see methods).  On average, our population of small cells (PTRE CCND1 + doxycycline) divided in ~19 hours, while the large cells (PTRE shCCND1 + doxycycline) divided in ~25 hours. Isolating our analysis to these short-lived proteins, when we compared the changes in protein turnover rate against the proteome size slope, we found a small, but significant correlation that partially explains the change in size-dependent proteome remodeling (Figure 3F). Therefore, protein turnover plays a significant, but minor role in shaping the protein composition of cells for short-lived proteins as they increase in size.
Size-dependent transcriptomic remodeling largely underlies proteome remodeling
If post-translational regulation plays only a minor role in size-dependent proteome remodeling, then transcriptional regulation may explain a majority of the protein-level changes (Figure 4A). In this model, we should expect that the fold changes observed for protein concentrations correlate with those observed at the mRNA level. Protein changes are, in general, known to be correlated with changes at the mRNA level, with typical Pearson R correlations between mRNA and protein levels around 0.6.57–59 In our previous study using budding yeast, cells arrested for varying time to generate differently sized cells showed high correlation between fold changes in mRNA with those of proteins with a Pearson R value of 0.63.33 In contrast, our original study of differential protein scaling in cultured human cells found only a moderate correlation between the size-dependence of mRNA and protein concentrations (Pearson R value of 0.29).30 This discrepancy may have arisen from the long sorting process to isolate cells of different sizes used in the original study, which could confound transcriptomic measurements because of the relatively short half-life of mRNA on the timescale of hours. 
To avoid the potential artifacts due to cell sorting, we used our CCND1 induction system to quickly process differently-sized cell populations for RNAseq analysis (Figure 4B). As before, we extracted the relative change in transcript concentration with increasing cell size (Figure 4C, Supplementary Table 4). In contrast to our previous study using sorted human cells, this quicker method of extraction yielded highly-correlated mRNA fold changes with protein fold changes with Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.74 (Figure 4D, Supplementary Table 4). We also note that sub-scaling proteins showed a systematic deviation from the identity line, implying additional regulations that buffer protein concentrations from the decrease in respective mRNA concentrations (Figure 4D, green line). Overall, combining both transcriptomic and protein half-life measurements, we were able to predict protein concentration changes with R2 = 0.75, with most of the explanatory power coming from the transcriptomic information (Figure 4E). We note that the number of proteins available for analysis is substantially lower in the protein turnover dataset than in the differentially scaling proteome dataset and this might bias our linear model. However, we find that the expression level and protein turnover are uncorrelated even for the lower expressed proteins. We therefore believe that the omissions of these lowly expressed proteins in the linear model do not affect our results (Figure S3G, S3H, S3I). Therefore, size-dependent protein remodeling appears to mostly originate at the level of transcription.
Size-dependent mRNA turnover does not explain transcriptomic remodeling
The composition of the transcriptome is determined by both synthesis and degradation. In our previous study in budding yeast, we found that bulk mRNA was stabilized with increased cell size to maintain mRNA concentration homeostasis.60 However, we did not test whether there were any differential changes in mRNA stability that could contribute to the size-dependence of mRNA concentrations (Figure 5A). We therefore tested if mRNA turnover is important for remodeling the transcriptome with increasing cell size. 
To test if mRNA turnover contributes to transcriptome remodeling with cell size, we employed SLAMseq, a metabolic RNA labeling approach that involves pulsing of the media with a uridine analog, thiouridine (s4U). This analog can then be converted to cytidine through an alkylation reaction and subsequently detected by mRNA sequencing as a T to C nucleotide substitution.61 During the chase period, the mRNA incorporating thiouridine gradually decays, which enables the mRNA half-life measurement. To test for size-dependence, we used our genetic system to generate populations of differently sized cells on which we performed SLAMseq. Briefly, we pulsed the media with thiouridine for 24 hours and then replaced the media with excess uridine to minimize further incorporation of thiouridine (see methods). We then collected samples over the next 24 hours for SLAMseq analysis (Figure 5B). By following the proportion of T to C substitution introduced by the incorporation of thiouridine, we could monitor the gradual decay of mRNA species bearing the nucleoside analog over time (Figure 5C). We fit the decay curve for each mRNA for respective cell sizes to determine the mRNA half-life (Figure 5D, Supplementary Table 5). The median mRNA half-life of all genes for medium sized cells was 6.7 hours, which is in agreement with previous estimate of ~6.9 hours for HeLa cells.62 Moreover, the mRNA half-lives of individual genes correlated well with those measured in a previous SLAMseq study of mESCs (Figure S5A).61 To determine the size-dependence of the turnover of mRNA transcripts, we then obtained the mRNA half-life ratio by dividing the mRNA half-life in large cells by that in small cells. We observed that all genes, except for those belonging to the top ~10% in mRNA half-life, did not show marked differential changes in half-life with increase in cell size. Instead, on average, the mRNAs showed a small absolute increase in half-life (Figure 5E, Supplementary Table 5). This is consistent with our previous work showing a broad stabilization of mRNA in larger yeast cells, which functioned to maintain mRNA concentrations in larger cells by counter-balancing the sub-scaling of mRNA synthesis.60 An analysis of our data revealed only a weak correlation between mRNA slope and mRNA half-life ratio, indicating that differential size-dependent effects on mRNA half-life do not underlie transcriptome remodeling (Figure 5F). We therefore conclude it is likely that size-dependent changes in transcription are mostly responsible for size-dependent transcriptome, and thereby, proteome remodeling. 
Size-scaling transcription is driven by an increase in burst length
Knowing that mRNA synthesis is key to understanding how mRNA composition differentially scales with cell size, we first sought to understand how mRNA scaling may be achieved through synthesis. Transcription occurs in bursts, where periods of dormancy are punctuated by periods of intense transcriptional activity so that the promoter can be seen to exist in at least two distinct states.63–66 These transitions are controlled in the promoter region, which serves as the nexus of many different transcriptional regulators, including chromatin modifications, nucleosome occupancy, enhancer-promoter contacts, and binding of transcriptional factors. All such modes of transcriptional regulation culminate in several kinetic bursting parameters, including burst size, amplitude, and ON/OFF times. These parameters are related to the number of transcripts produced during a productive burst period, average loading rate of RNA polymerase II, and the productive/inactive period of transcription respectively. Previous works have shown that transcript abundance scales with the increase in cell size in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes.60,67–70 In fixed human cells, smFISH data measuring the distributions of mRNA counts was used with a mathematical model of expected variability to infer that an increase in burst size primarily drives the scaling of transcription with cell size.70 However, there has been no real-time analysis of transcriptional bursts to confirm the scaling of burst size with cell size, and it is unclear whether there are other factors contributing to transcriptomic scaling. 
To determine how transcriptional burst parameters are modulated by increasing cell size, we sought to visualize transcription in real-time using the MS2 system to fluorescently label individual mRNA molecules at the site of transcription.71–75 We performed this size-dependent burst analysis using near-diploid HBEC-kt3 cells that have MS2 stem loops incorporated into their genes’ endogenous introns (Figure 6A).76 We chose to image the bursts of two genes, RAB7A and RHOA, which we classified to be scaling in our RPE-1 RNAseq data (Figure S6A, S6B). After imaging these cells in their natural cycling state, we segmented and tracked their burst dynamics using a custom algorithm (Figure 6B) (see methods). ON and OFF states were determined based on intensity thresholding. Since we did not have a cell cycle marker, we instead segregated cells by their nuclear area, and took a range of cells within a nuclear size window that we knew to be highly enriched in G1 (Figure S6C, S6D). From our traces, we extracted features of transcriptional bursts and asked how they changed with increasing nuclear volume in G1 (Figure 6C). We used nuclear area measurements to estimate the nuclear volume, which we previously found to be highly correlated with cell size.77 In agreement with previous work,67,70 we found that both RAB7A and RHOA scaled their burst size with cell size, indicating increased number of RNA polymerase II loading onto the promoter during initiation, or the increase in number of RNA polymerase II released in a given pause-release. Decomposing burst size into ON time and average burst amplitude, we found that the scaling of burst size originates mainly from the scaling of ON time, meaning that once the gene is activated, it remains activated for a longer time in larger cells than in smaller cells. Burst amplitude remained relatively constant. Inactive periods between productive transcription are also shortened, although the magnitude of this change was not as large as the change in ON time (Figure 6D, Figure S6E, Supplementary Table 6, 7). Taken together, our data indicate that as cells get larger, they scale up transcription mainly by prolonging the productive burst period but also, to a lesser extent, by more quickly reactivating transcription.
DISCUSSION 
Understanding how cell size influences cell physiology is essential for understanding why cell size is tightly regulated and different types of cells adopt different characteristic sizes. Cell physiology is most holistically represented in its proteome composition, which changes with size. Such a size-dependent proteome remodeling is highly conserved as it has now been measured in multiple different human cell types using orthogonal experimental strategies, as well as in both yeast and E. coli.30,31,33,34 To identify the mechanistic origin of size-dependent proteome remodeling in human cells, we generated cell lines cycling at different sizes to measure protein and mRNA concentrations and their turnover rates. Our analysis revealed that differential size-dependent transcription drives the size-dependence of proteome remodeling in human cells. For two genes whose transcription scales in proportion to cell size, we show that this mostly results from an increase in the duration of a transcriptional burst and that changes in the duration of promoter inactivity and transcription amplitude were more minor (Figure 7A). Size-dependent proteome remodeling is primarily driven by the differential scaling of transcription at individual genes, whereas mRNA and protein turnover rates are largely robust to changes in cell size and thus only weakly contribute to proteome remodeling (Figure 7B). Overall, our findings provide the most detailed investigation of size-dependent gene expression pathways to date.
Size-dependent transcriptional bursting scales gene expression
After identifying a primarily transcriptional basis for size-dependent proteome remodeling, we sought to mechanistically probe how increasing cell size drives changes to specific features of transcription to achieve uniform scaling. Specifically, we examined rate parameters related to transcriptional bursting dynamics, namely their rates of initiation, duration, and amplitude.64,78 To see how cell size modulated these features of transcription, we used live-imaging of transcriptional loci to examine two endogenous size-scaling genes, RAB7A and RHOA. The transcription of these two genes scales in proportion to cell size predominantly due to longer ON times, but also from minor contributions from the initiation rate and amplitude. This is consistent with previous smFISH studies concluding that the total amount of transcripts in a burst increases with cell size in human cells.67,70 However, these previous studies lacked the resolution to further decompose the relationship between transcriptional bursts and cell size because they lacked the detailed temporal information of burst dynamics that we provide from our live-cell analysis.
The increase in burst size driven by increased ON times of RAB7A and RHOA echoes previous studies linking MYC with modulation of burst size and ON time.79,80 MYC over-expression drove a global upregulation of transcription through an increase in burst size mainly due to an increase in ON length.79 Single molecule tracking of core transcriptional regulators such as TBP, SPT5, and MED1 showed a change in their dwell time, which may explain the increase in ON length. While it is unclear whether MYC, a well-known growth regulator, is responsible for the size-dependent modulation of transcriptional burst parameters, we speculate that such a mechanism could be at play through various activating transcription factors. For example, larger cells may have a greater number of transcription factors, but a constant number of binding sites on the genome. This leads to an effective increase in transcription factor binding and promoter occupancy that can increase transcription in large cells similar to MYC overexpression. Future studies could test this by examining residence times of transcription factors at the promoters of scaling genes using single molecule microscopy methods.81 
What is the molecular basis for size-dependent transcriptional remodeling?
Though the two model genes whose bursting parameters we measured illustrate how transcriptional output scales in proportion to cell volume, this proportional scaling clearly does not occur at all genes. Indeed, individual genes can couple the scaling of their transcription to cell volume to varying degrees and thereby drive the differential transcriptome remodeling we and others have observed.31,33
A recent study investigating how the transcriptome changes with cell size in budding yeast proposed that size-dependent changes to the transcriptome are driven by transcriptomic “inversions”.82 Similar findings of size-dependent scaling of transcription based on basal expression were reported for genome-diluted intestinal cells in C. elegans.83 These inversions occur when RNA polymerase binding saturates at highly expressed genes and therefore results in their relative down-regulation in large cells. If this model were true for mammalian cells, we would expect to see bias in our mRNA slopes measurements, with mRNAs with higher basal expression levels having more negative slopes. However, we do not see any correlation between the basal expression level of an mRNA and its propensity to super- or sub-scale with size (Figure S4A).
We speculate two possible explanations for how differential scaling could occur. First, each individual gene is encoded in a way that predetermines how the binding and bursting of transcriptional machinery will scale with volume. While the two example genes we measure increase transcription linearly with volume, other genes could be encoded to adopt different trajectories and thus result in differential scaling. Though it remains unclear how this gene feature would be encoded, it would present interesting evolutionary implications, since the decision to tune up or down the transcription of certain genes in large cells would be hardwired in the genome. Alternatively, differential scaling could be explained by an upstream regulatory signal that gradually changes as cells grow larger and thereby alters the transcriptional landscape. This possibility is supported by the fact that size-dependent transcriptional remodeling closely resembles the transcriptional changes associated with mTOR inhibition.33,35 Finally, the size-dependent proteome remodeling is dependent on the dilution of the genome with increasing cell size.30,31,33,43 Thus, changes in growth-related signaling that coincide with dilution of the genome could represent an upstream signal that drives the differential scaling of the transcriptome.
mRNA and protein turnover do not show differential changes with cell size
We observe that both protein and mRNA half-lives are largely unchanged with increasing cell size. We do, however, see a small population-wide increase in the mRNA half-life with increase in size (Figure 5E), which is consistent with the previous observation that yeast mRNA is stabilized as cell size increases to maintain a constant total mRNA concentration.60 Additionally, while our study focused on fast growth conditions where proteome composition is mostly determined by synthesis rather than active degradation, this is not the case in conditions where cells are growing more slowly or not proliferating. In these slow growth conditions, which are common in the terminally differentiated cells of our bodies, degradation rates substantially contribute to the concentration of proteins of non-proliferating cells.52 Indeed, a recent study that examined the relationship between protein degradation and growth rate found that almost 50% of proteome composition of some non-proliferative cells could be explained by the degradation rates of individual proteins.84 Finally, there was another recent study examining the relationship between cell size and protein degradation rates which reported that large cells hyper-activate their proteasomes to upregulate protein degradation.85 However, this study uses polyubiquitinated lysine (K48-polyUb) as a proxy for degradation, so the magnitude of the effect is unclear. We further note that the authors of this study found that size increase through CDK4/6 inhibition, which is analogous to our method of cell size increase, specifically did not lead to increased protein degradation.
Altered cell vulnerability with cell size deviation
Proteome “imbalance” is a central concern in overgrown cells with diluted genomes.37,86–88 Lysosomal proteins are among the highest super-scaling proteins in our dataset, and aberrant lysosomal function has been linked to various cell defects including senescence.49–51 We therefore reasoned that even cells close to their natural size range may be beginning to show altered lysosomal states. Indeed, we find that large proliferating cells have higher vulnerability to lysosomal perturbation by inhibition from both LLoMe and chloroquine. While our effect size was not large, in contexts where cells are much enlarged, for example following CDK4/6 inhibition, these lysosomal vulnerabilities may be a potential useful exploit for treatment.89 
Finally, the cell-size dependent changes in biosynthesis that create unique vulnerabilities have also been reported in other contexts, with upregulation of IRF4 following CDK4/6 inhibition sensitizing multiple myeloma cells to bortezomib, and increased dependence of large cells on GPX4 from higher lipid and iron content making them vulnerable to ferroptosis.90,91 We speculate that there may be more unique cell size-dependent vulnerabilities stemming from the imbalance in biosynthesis that can be exploited for cancer therapy.
Limitations of the study
Our in-depth study using human cultured cells has allowed us to provide detailed analysis on how gene expression pathways are affected in a size-dependent manner. One potential limitation of our study is that our CCND1 manipulation lines were polyclonal for their CCND1 expression. This could potentially create subpopulations within our samples that display different cell cycle and size dynamics. However, we find that cell cycle phase does not seem to play a large role in size-dependent proteome remodeling, and we do not observe presence of significant subpopulations within our samples following size induction, although for large cells, there may be small but increasing number of cells that can overcome the CCND1 knockdown. Nevertheless, this pace is slow, and most of our timescale of interest lies within the first few days following stabilization in size and proteome. Finally, we have not experimentally addressed how super-scaling and sub-scaling may be achieved through modulation of transcriptional burst regulators. Future work involving high-throughput microscopy and sequencing combined with synthetic transcriptional platforms that can isolate the effects of different transcriptional modulators may provide insight into how cells differentially scale transcription.
